




















\section{Introduction}

% Describe the challenge to tackle in a specific context.
% Challenge: hit classification
% Context  : SPI experiments

Single-particle imaging (SPI) by X-ray free-electron lasers (XFELs) is a
promising method of determining the three-dimensional structure of
noncrystalline biomolecules at room temperature.  In SPI experiments,
femtosecond coherent X-ray beams strike biomolecules sprayed into the beam path,
causing scattering of radiation before destruction of the samples inflicted by
the intense X-rays.  This way of collecting scattering datasets is known as the
\textit{diffraction before destruction} approach
\cite{neutzePotentialBiomolecularImaging2000,
chapmanFemtosecondDiffractiveImaging2006,seibertSingleMimivirusParticles2011,
aquilaLinacCoherentLight2015,reddyCoherentSoftXray2017a}.  Scattering patterns
in SPI experiments largely fall into four categories, depending on how X-ray
pulses hit sample particles delivered through jet streams.  Astonishingly, 98\%
X-ray pulses miss their target particles
\cite{shiEvaluationPerformanceClassification2019}, leading to no scattering
pattern identified as a \textit{no-hit}.  When X-ray photons collides with one
and only one sample particle, the emerging scattering pattern is defined as a
\textit{single-hit}. Expectedly, a \textit{multi-hit} happens when X-ray pulses
and a cluster of sample particles intersect. In some cases, X-ray pulses might
hit non-biological objects in delivery medium and those resulting scattering
patterns are labeled as \textit{non-sample-hit}s.  Among the four categories,
only \textit{single-hit}s will contribute to reconstruction of electron density
maps through downstream data processing, e.g. orientation recovery and phase
retrieval.  Therefore, the main goal of a SPI hit classifier is to identify
\textit{single-hit}s.  For simplicity, we will use the word \textit{hit} to
represent an image of SPI scattering pattern of any class throughout the rest of the paper.  


% Past works

Some pioneering works addressing the challenge of classifying \textit{hit}s have
been developed.  Unsupervised methods
\cite{yoonUnsupervisedClassificationSingleparticle2011,
giannakisSymmetriesImageFormation2012,schwanderSymmetriesImageFormation2012,
yoonNovelAlgorithmsCoherent2012,
andreassonAutomatedIdentificationClassification2014,
bobkovSortingAlgorithmsSingleparticle2015} focus on extracting image features
from \textit{hit} samples and finding clusters of \textit{single-hit}s.  However,
unsupervised solutions are highly problem-specific, that is to say, it's not
realistic to expect \textit{single-hit}s from different biological samples would
cluster in the feature space.  Moreover, despite being unsupervised, those
solutions also require prior knowledge of data distribution in feature space for
classification, rendering it incapable of being automated.  On the other hand,
supervised solutions based on artificial neural network models
\cite{shiEvaluationPerformanceClassification2019,
ignatenkoClassificationDiffractionPatterns2021} have been employed to recognize
\textit{hit} classes through learning from labeled \textit{hit}s.  In these
neural network models, convolutional neural networks (CNN) were applied for
feature extraction and a fully connected (FC) layer is directly attached to the
convolutional layers for classification.  Training both the CNN vision core and
the classifier made of FC layers simultaneously can be very inefficient and
become a bottleneck in real-time classification.  Furthermore, all previous
solutions, unsupervised or supervised, require human in the loop for labeling
before they can be applied to classification.  It would be great if we can train
a model that can be generalized to recognize \textit{hit}s obtained from various
biological samples.  To our knowledge, there's currently no such \textit{hit}
classifier demonstrated even on simulated \textit{hit}s.  


% (3) What are the core challenges?  In this work, we do this.  Concretely, our
% contributions are ... 

In this work, we strive to tackle the problem of real-time SPI \textit{hit}
classification by training an artificial neural network model that directly
learns the embedding of \textit{hit}s.  Depending on whether the solution
requires human in the loop, there are two possible directions to approach this
goal: (1) Use an experiment-specific model but trained efficiently in real time;
(2) Train a generalized model that identifies \textit{hit}s from entirely
different biological samples.  In the first scenario, the primary challenge is
the design of a nerual network model that allows efficient training.  In the
second scenario, we face a more practical challenge: there is no existing
experimental or simulated dataset that contains \textit{hit}s from a large
(hundreds or thousands) variety of biological samples.

We approach the \textit{hit} classification problem with one of the embedding
learning techniques, which have been actively studied in the domain of machine
learning, especially for computer vision or natural language processing
applications.  One successful example is FaceNet
\cite{schroffFaceNetUnifiedEmbedding2015} that is a generalized face embedding
model with a deep convolutional neural network (CNN) trained on 100-200 million
images of human faces.  FaceNet uses a contrastive learning approach to
distinguish one class from another.  Fundementally, the model doesn't try to
learn human-engineered notions of a \textit{single-hit}, but it learns to
understand that \textit{single-hit} is different from \textit{multi-hit} or
\textit{non-sample-hit}.  We share the same insight that it should be much
easier to draw contrast between two things than to learn the notion of an
individual class.  Similar to the FaceNet model, our neural network model learns
\textit{hit} embeddings directly by drawing constrasts from many triplets of
\textit{hit}s.  A triplet consists of an anchor image, a positive image that
shares the same label as the anchor, and a negative image that has a different
label.  We train our model using the triplet loss function proposed in the
FaceNet.  

Concretely, our contributions are summarized below.  

\begin{itemize}

    \item We introduce a neural network model that classifies SPI
    \textit{single-hit}s with a 99\% accuracy but only takes under 15 minutes to
    train on a NVIDIA 1080Ti, on which the inference speed can reach an
    approximate frequency of $450 \text{Hz}$.  The model learns from 80 uniquely
    labeled \textit{hit}s per class and there are three classes in consideration:
    \textit{single-hit}, \textit{multi-hit} and \textit{non-sample-hit}.
    Moreover, the model can still yield an accuracy above 90\% at the cost of
    labeling 40 unique \textit{hit}s per class.  Thanks to the low demand on the
    number of training examples and short training time, our model is sufficient
    to take on real-time \textit{hit} classification tasks at least at the $450
    \text{Hz}$ realm.  

    \item We highlight a promising result that our neural network model can be
    generalized to recognize \textit{simulated} SPI \textit{hit}s from different
    biological samples with a 86\% test accuracy.  The practical implication of
    this result is currently limited due to the shortage of labeled experimental
    datasets, but our model is a step closer to realizing a generalized
    \textit{hit} classification model.  

\end{itemize}
